Course 1 
Module 2 



Viruses
Malware
Social engineering
Digital Age
Security domains




Computer Virus : Malicious code written to interfere with computer operations and cause damage to data and software
Brain virus
Morris worm


Two notable attacks that relied on the internet : the LoveLetter attack and the Equifax breach. 
The Brain Virus was intended to safeguard medical software from piracy, but instead of tracking illegal copies, it infected computers with a virus that spread to any inserted disks. software. 
The Morris Worm crawled the web and installed itself onto other computers to tally the number of computers that were connected to the internet, failed to keep track of the computers it had already compromised and continued to re-install itself until the computers ran out of memory and crashed, After the Morris worm, Computer Emergency Response Teams, known as CERTs®, were established to respond to computer security incidents.

Social engineering : A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or valuables 

Social media phishing: A threat actor collects detailed information about their target from social media sites. Then, they initiate an attack.
Watering hole attack: A threat actor attacks a website frequently visited by a specific group of users.
USB baiting: A threat actor strategically leaves a malware USB stick for an employee to find and install, to unknowingly infect a network. 
Physical social engineering: A threat actor impersonates an employee, customer, or vendor to obtain unauthorized access to a physical location.




Social engineering principles : Social engineering is incredibly effective. This is because people are generally trusting and conditioned to respect authority. The number of social engineering attacks is increasing with every new social media application that allows public access to people's data. Although sharing personal data—such as your location or photos—can be convenient, it’s also a risk.
Authority: Threat actors impersonate individuals with power. This is because people, in general, have been conditioned to respect and follow authority figures. 
Intimidation: Threat actors use bullying tactics. This includes persuading and intimidating victims into doing what they’re told. 
Consensus/Social proof: Because people sometimes do things that they believe many others are doing, threat actors use others’ trust to pretend they are legitimate. For example, a threat actor might try to gain access to private data by telling an employee that other people at the company have given them access to that data in the past. 
Scarcity: A tactic used to imply that goods or services are in limited supply. 
Familiarity: Threat actors establish a fake emotional connection with users that can be exploited.  
Trust: Threat actors establish an emotional relationship with users that can be exploited over time. They use this relationship to develop trust and gain personal information.
Urgency: A threat actor persuades others to respond quickly and without questioning.








Phishing : The use of digital communications to trick people into revealing sensitive data or deploying malicious software

Business Email Compromise (BEC): A threat actor sends an email message that seems to be from a known source to make a seemingly legitimate request for information, in order to obtain a financial advantage.
Spear phishing: A malicious email attack that targets a specific user or group of users. The email seems to originate from a trusted source.
Whaling: A form of spear phishing. Threat actors target company executives to gain access to sensitive data.
Vishing: The exploitation of electronic voice communication to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source.
Smishing: The use of text messages to trick users, in order to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source.
Malware : software designed to harm devices or networks. There are many types of malware. The primary purpose of malware is to obtain money, or in some cases, an intelligence advantage that can be used against a person, an organization, or a territory.
Viruses: Malicious code written to interfere with computer operations and cause damage to data and software. A virus needs to be initiated by a user (i.e., a threat actor), who transmits the virus via a malicious attachment or file download. When someone opens the malicious attachment or download, the virus hides itself in other files in the now infected system. When the infected files are opened, it allows the virus to insert its own code to damage and/or destroy data in the system.
Worms: Malware that can duplicate and spread itself across systems on its own. In contrast to a virus, a worm does not need to be downloaded by a user. Instead, it self-replicates and spreads from an already infected computer to other devices on the same network.
Ransomware: A malicious attack where threat actors encrypt an organization's data and demand payment to restore access. 
Spyware: Malware that’s used to gather and sell information without consent. Spyware can be used to access devices. This allows threat actors to collect personal data, such as private emails, texts, voice and image recordings, and locations.
Terms review

Malware : A software designed to harm devices or networks
Virus : A malware program that modifies other computer programs by inserting its own code to damage and destroy data
Worm : Malware that self-replicates,spreading across the network and infecting computers
Ransomware : A malicious attack during which threat actors encrypt an organization’s data and demand payment to restore access
Spyware : Malicious software installed on a user's computer without their permission, which is used to spy on and steal user data
Phishing : The use of digital communications to trick people into revealing sensitive data or deploying malicious software
Business email compromise (BEC) : An attack in which a threat actor impersonates a known source to obtain a financial advantage
Spear phishing: A malicious email attack that targets a specific user or group of users. The email seems to originate from a trusted source.
Whaling: A form of spear phishing. Threat actors target company executives to gain access to sensitive data.
Vishing: The exploitation of electronic voice communication to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source.
Smishing: The use of text messages to trick users, in order to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source.
Social engineering : A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or valuables 

Social media phishing: A threat actor collects detailed information about their target from social media sites. Then, they initiate an attack.
Watering hole attack: A threat actor attacks a website frequently visited by a specific group of users.
USB baiting: A threat actor strategically leaves a malware USB stick for an employee to find and install, to unknowingly infect a network. 
Physical social engineering: A threat actor impersonates an employee, customer, or vendor to obtain unauthorized access to a physical location.




CISSP Security domains
security and risk management : Defines security goals and objectives, risk mitigation, compliance, business continuity, and the law
asset security : Secures digital and physical assets, it’s also related to the storage, maintenance, retention and destruction of data
security architecture and engineering : optimizes data security by ensuring effective tools, systems, and processes are in place
communication and network security : Manage and secure physical networks and wireless communications
identity and access management : keeps data secure, by ensuring users follow established policies to control and manage physical assets, like office spaces and logical assets, such as networks and applications
security assessment and testing : Conducting security control testing, collecting and analyzing data, and conducting security audits to monitor for risks,  threats, and vulnerabilities 
security operations : Conducting investigations and implementing preventative measures
software development security : Uses secure coding practices, which are a set of recommended guidelines that are used to create secure applications and services














Attack types
Password attack
Brute force
Rainbow table
Social engineering attack
Phishing
Smishing
Vishing
Spear phishing
Whaling
Social media phishing
Business Email Compromise (BEC)
Watering hole attack
USB (Universal Serial Bus) baiting
Physical social engineering 
Physical attack
Malicious USB cable
Malicious flash drive
Card cloning and skimming
Adversarial artificial intelligence : is a technique that manipulates artificial intelligence and machine learning technology to conduct attacks more efficiently. Adversarial artificial intelligence falls under both the communication and network security and the identity and access management domains.
Supply-chain attack : A supply-chain attack targets systems, applications, hardware, and/or software to locate a vulnerability where malware can be deployed
Cryptographic attack
Birthday
Collision
Downgrade




Threat actor types
Advanced persistent threats (APTs) :Advanced persistent threats (APTs) have significant expertise accessing an organization's network without authorization. APTs tend to research their targets (e.g., large corporations or government entities)  in advance and can remain undetected for an extended period of time.
Damaging critical infrastructure, such as the power grid and natural resources
Gaining access to intellectual property, such as trade secrets or patents

Insider threats : Insider threats abuse their authorized access to obtain data that may harm an organization. Their intentions and motivations can include: 
Sabotage
Corruption
Espionage
Unauthorized data access or leaks

Hacktivists : Hacktivists are threat actors that are driven by a political agenda. They abuse digital technology to accomplish their goals
Demonstrations
Propaganda
Social change campaigns
Fame









Module 3
Security frameworks and controls
Ethics of security


Security frameworks : Guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risk and threats to data and privacy


Components of security frameworks
Identifying and documenting security goals
Setting guidelines to achieve security goals
Implementing security processes 
Monitoring and communicating results


Security controls : Safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks


CIA Triad : A foundational model that helps inform how organizations consider risk when setting up systems and security polices
CIA : Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability
Confidentiality : Only authorized users can access specific assets or data
Integrity : Data is correct, authentic, and reliable
Availability : Data is accessible to those who are authorized to access it




Asset : An item perceived as having value to an organization


NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) : A voluntary framework that consists of standards, guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk


General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) : GDPR is a European Union (E.U.) general data regulation that protects the processing of E.U. residents’ data and their right to privacy in and out of E.U. territory

Security Ethics : Guidelines for making appropriate decisions as a security professional


Ethical principles in security
Confidentiality 
Privacy protections
Laws


Counterattacks: Actions taken against threat actors, which are illegal in the U.S. and can lead to serious consequences, including escalation of attacks.
Hacktivist: A person who uses hacking to achieve a political goal
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA): A U.S. federal law established to protect patients' health information
Protected health information (PHI): Information that relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual
Security architecture: A type of security design composed of multiple components, such as tools and processes, that are used to protect an organization from risks and external threat
Security governance: Practices that help support, define, and direct security efforts of an organization
Sensitive personally identifiable information (SPII): A specific type of PII that falls under stricter handling guidelines
Laws: Rules recognized by a community and enforced by a governing entity, which security professionals must adhere to in their practice.



































Module 4

Log : A record of events that occur within an organization’s systems

Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) : An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization

Commonly used SIEM tools 
Splunk : Data analysis platform 
Chronicle : cloud-native SIEM tool that stores security data for search and analysis

Other key security tools
Playbooks : A manual that provides details about any operational action
Network protocol analyzers(packet sniffer) : A tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic within a network (includes tcpdump and Wireshark)

Types of playbook
Chain of custody playbook : process of documenting evidence procession and control during an incident lifecycle
Protecting and preserving evidence playbook : process of properly working with fragile and volatile digital evidence 

Order of volatility: A sequence outlining the order of data that must be preserved from first to last

Programming : Used to create a specific set of instructions for a computer to execute tasks

Linux : An open source operating system that can be used to examine logs

Linux traditionally relied on the CLI, but modern distributions typically come with a graphical user interface (GUI), which allows users to interact with the system using windows, icons, and menus, similar to Windows or macOS

Structured Query Language(SQL) : A programming language used to create, interact with, and request information from a database

Database : an organized collection of information or data. There can be millions of data points in a database

Data point : Specific piece of information

Python : Used to perform tasks that are repetitive and time-consuming, and that require a high level of detail and accuracy 

Automation : the use of technology to reduce human and manual effort in performing common and repetitive tasks, it also helps reduce the risk of human error.

Operating system : the interface between computer hardware and the user, Linux, macOS,and windows are operating systems

Command : instruction telling the computer to do something

Command line : text based user interface that uses commands to interact with computer

Web vulnerability : a unique flaw in a web application that a threat actor could exploit by using malicious code or behavior, to allow unauthorized access, data theft, and malware deployment

Antivirus software : a software program used to prevent, detect, and eliminate malware and viruses. It is also called anti-malware

Intrusion detection system(IDS) : an application that monitors system activity and alerts on possible intrusions

Encryption : the process of converting data from a readable format to a cryptographically encoded format

Cryptographic encoding : converting plaintext into secure ciphertext

Plaintext : unencrypted information and secure ciphertext is the result of encryption

Penetration testing : the act of participating in a simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities in systems, networks,websites, applications, and processes 








Portfolios
Documents folder
Resume
Education
Portfolio documents
Cybersecurity tools
Programming 
Google Drive or Dropbox™
Google Sites
Git repository
GitLab
Bitbucket™
GitHub


Key concepts 

Document Folder: A document folder is a local storage option on a computer where professionals can organize their portfolio documents and images for easy access.
Cloud Storage (Google Drive, Dropbox): Cloud storage services like Google Drive and Dropbox allow users to store and share portfolio documents online, providing easy access and collaboration features.
Google Sites: Google Sites is a website hosting platform that enables users to create customizable portfolio websites that can be shared with potential employers.
Git Repository: A Git repository is a version-controlled space where professionals can store and showcase their portfolio projects, including code and documentation.
Cybersecurity Portfolio: A cybersecurity portfolio is a collection of documents and projects that demonstrate a professional's education, skills, and knowledge in the field of cybersecurity.






































Course 2
Module 1 - Security domains

CISSP Security Domains: The eight domains defined by the Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) framework that outline the key areas of knowledge in cybersecurity


Risk Management Framework: A structured process for identifying, assessing, and mitigating risks to an organization's information and assets, often guided by standards such as those from NIST


Security Frameworks: Structured approaches that provide guidelines and best practices for managing security risks and ensuring the protection of information assets


Security Tools: Software and systems used by cybersecurity professionals to monitor, detect, and respond to security incidents and vulnerabilities


CISSP Security domains
security and risk management : Defines security goals and objectives, risk mitigation, compliance, business continuity, and the law
Security goals and objectives
Risk mitigation processes
Compliance
Business continuity plans
Legal regulations
Professional and organizational ethics
asset security : Secures digital and physical assets, it’s also related to the storage, maintenance, retention and destruction of data
security architecture and engineering : optimizes data security by ensuring effective tools, systems, and processes are in place
Threat modeling
Least privilege
Defense in depth
Fail securely
Separation of duties
Keep it simple
Zero trust
Trust but verify
communication and network security : Manage and secure physical networks and wireless communications
identity and access management : keeps data secure, by ensuring users follow established policies to control and manage physical assets, like office spaces and logical assets, such as networks and applications
security assessment and testing : Conducting security control testing, collecting and analyzing data, and conducting security audits to monitor for risks,  threats, and vulnerabilities 
security operations : Conducting investigations and implementing preventative measures
software development security : Uses secure coding practices, which are a set of recommended guidelines that are used to create secure applications and services


Security posture: An organization’s ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data, and react to change


Risk mitigation: The process of having the right procedures and rules in place to quickly reduce the impact of a risk like a breach


Business continuity: An organization’s ability to maintain their everyday productivity by establishing risk disaster recovery plans


Shared responsibility: All individuals within an organization take an active role in lowering risk and maintaining both physical and virtual security


Components of identity and access management(IAM)
Identification
Authentication
Authorization
Accountabillity


Threat: Any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets


Social engineering : A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or valuables 

Low risk asset: information that would not harm the organization’s reputation or ongoing operations, and would not cause financial damage if compromised

Medium risk asset: Information that’s not available to the public and may cause some damage to the organization’s finances, reputation, or ongoing operations

High risk asset: Information protected by regulations or laws, which if compromised would have a severe negative impact on an organization’s finances, ongoing operations, or reputation
Vulnerability: A weakness that can be exploited by a threat

Ransomware: A malicious attack where threat actors encrypt an organization’s data and demand payment to restore access

Layers of the web
Surface web
Deep web
Dark web

Key impacts
Financial
Identity theft
Reputation

Risk Management Framework (RMF) 7steps
Prepare : Activities that are necessary to manage security and privacy risks before a breach occurs
Categorize: Used to develop risk management processes and tasks
Select: Choose, customize, and capture documentation of the controls that protect an organization 
Implement: Implement security and privacy plans for the organization
Assess: Determine if established controls are implemented correctly
Authorize: Being accountable for the security and privacy risks that may exist in an organization 
Monitor: Be aware of how systems are operating 




 Some common strategies used to manage risks include
Acceptance: Accepting a risk to avoid disrupting business continuity
Avoidance: Creating a plan to avoid the risk altogether
Transference: Transferring risk to a third party to manage
Mitigation: Lessening the impact of a known risk


Risks
External risk: Anything outside the organization that has the potential to harm organizational assets, such as threat actors attempting to gain access to private information
Internal risk: A current or former employee, vendor, or trusted partner who poses a security risk
Legacy systems: Old systems that might not be accounted for or updated, but can still impact assets, such as workstations or old mainframe systems. For example, an organization might have an old vending machine that takes credit card payments or a workstation that is still connected to the legacy accounting system.
Multiparty risk: Outsourcing work to third-party vendors can give them access to intellectual property, such as trade secrets, software designs, and inventions.
Software compliance/licensing: Software that is not updated or in compliance, or patches that are not installed in a timely manner


Vulnerabilities
ProxyLogon: A pre-authenticated vulnerability that affects the Microsoft Exchange server. This means a threat actor can complete a user authentication process to deploy malicious code from a remote location.
ZeroLogon: A vulnerability in Microsoft’s Netlogon authentication protocol. An authentication protocol is a way to verify a person's identity. Netlogon is a service that ensures a user’s identity before allowing access to a website's location.
Log4Shell: Allows attackers to run Java code on someone else’s computer or leak sensitive information. It does this by enabling a remote attacker to take control of devices connected to the internet and run malicious code.
PetitPotam: Affects Windows New Technology Local Area Network (LAN) Manager (NTLM). It is a theft technique that allows a LAN-based attacker to initiate an authentication request.
Security logging and monitoring failures: Insufficient logging and monitoring capabilities that result in attackers exploiting vulnerabilities without the organization knowing it
Server-side request forgery: Allows attackers to manipulate a server-side application into accessing and updating backend resources. It can also allow threat actors to steal data.


























Course 2
Module 2 - Security frameworks and controls

Security frameworks: Guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risk and threats to data and privacy
 
Security controls: Safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks
Encryption: The process of converting data from a readable format to encoded format
Authentication: The process of verifying who someone or something is
Biometrics: Unique physical characteristics that can be used to verify a person’s identity
Vishing: The exploitation of electronic voice communication to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source

Authorization: The concept of granting access to specific resources within a system

CIA Triad : A foundational model that helps inform how organizations consider risk when setting up systems and security polices
CIA : Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability
Confidentiality : Only authorized users can access specific assets or data
Integrity : Data is correct, authentic, and reliable
Availability : Data is accessible to those who are authorized to access it


NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) : A voluntary framework that consists of standards, guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk


6 core functions of NIST
Govern : emphasizes the importance of strong cybersecurity governance across all levels of the organization
Identify: The management of cybersecurity risk and its effect on an organization’s people and assets
Protect: The strategy used to protect an organization through the implementation of policies, procedures, training, and tools that help mitigate cybersecurity threats
Detect: Identifying potential security incidents and improving monitoring capabilities to increase the speed and efficiency of detections
Respond: Making sure that the proper procedures are used to contain, neutralize, and analyze security incidents, and implement improvements to the security process
Recover: The process of retuning affected systems back to normal operation


NIST S.P. 800-53: A unified framework for protecting the security of information systems within the federal government


OWASP security principles
Minimize attack surface area: Attack surface refers to all the potential vulnerabilities a threat actor could exploit.
Principle of least privilege: Users have the least amount of access required to perform their everyday tasks.
Defense in depth: Organizations should have varying security controls that mitigate risks and threats.
Separation of duties: Critical actions should rely on multiple people, each of whom follow the principle of least privilege. 
Keep security simple: Avoid unnecessarily complicated solutions. Complexity makes security difficult. 
Fix security issues correctly: When security incidents occur, identify the root cause, contain the impact, identify vulnerabilities, and conduct tests to ensure that remediation is successful.
Establish secure defaults: this principle means that the optimal security state of an application is also its default state for users; it should take extra work to make the application insecure. 
Fail securely: when a control fails or stops, it should do so by defaulting to its most secure option. For example, when a firewall fails it should simply close all connections and block all new ones, rather than start accepting everything.
Security audit: A review of an organization’s security controls, policies, and procedures against a set of expectations


Purposes of internal security audits
Identify organizational risk
Assess controls
Correct compliance issue


Common elements of internal audits
Establishing the scope and goals
Conducting a risk assessment
Completing a controls assessment
Assessing compliance
Communicating


Scope: refers to the specific criteria of an internal security audit


Audit questions
What is the audit meant to achieve ? 
Which assets are most at risk
Are current controls sufficient to protect those assets ? 
What controls and compliance regulations need to be implemented ?




Control categories 
Administrative controls
Technical controls
Physical controls


Stakeholder communication
Summarizes scope and goals
Lists existing risks
Notes how quickly those risks need to be addressed 
Identifies compliance regulations
Provides recommendation


A security professional closely examines their organization’s network, then evaluates potential risks to the network. Their goal is to ensure internal safeguards and processes are effective. What security concept does this scenario describe? Control assessment















Course 2
Module 3 - Introduction to cybersecurity tools

Log: A record of events that occur within an organization's system and networks

Common log  sources
Firewall logs: Record of attempted or established connections for incoming traffic from the internet. It also includes outbound requests to the internet from within the network
Network logs: Record of all computers and devices that enter and leave the network. It also records connections between devices and services on the network.
Server logs: Record of events related to services such as websites, emails or file shares. It includes actions such as login, password, and username requests

Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) : An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization

SIEM tools must be configured and customized to meet each organization's unique security needs.

Metrics: Key technical attributes, such as response time, availability, and failure rate, which are used to assess the performance of a software application

Security orchestration, automation, and response (SOAR): a collection of applications, tools, and workflows that uses automation to respond to security events

Different types of SIEM tools
Self hosted
Cloud hosted

Splunk Enterprise: A self hosted tool used to retain, analyze, and search an organization’s log data to provide security information and alerts in real time

Splunk cloud: A cloud hosted tool used to collect, search, and monitor log data

Splunk: Splunk offers different SIEM tool options: Splunk® Enterprise and Splunk® Cloud. Both allow you to review an organization's data on dashboards. This helps security professionals manage an organization's internal infrastructure by collecting, searching, monitoring, and analyzing log data from multiple sources to obtain full visibility into an organization’s everyday operations. 



Splunk dashboards
Security posture dashboard: The security posture dashboard is designed for security operations centers (SOCs). It displays the last 24 hours of an organization’s notable security-related events and trends and allows security professionals to determine if security infrastructure and policies are performing as designed. 
Executive summary dashboard: The executive summary dashboard analyzes and monitors the overall health of the organization over time. This helps security teams improve security measures that reduce risk. 
Incident review dashboard: The incident review dashboard allows analysts to identify suspicious patterns that can occur in the event of an incident. 
Risk analysis dashboard: The risk analysis dashboard helps analysts identify risk for each risk object (e.g., a specific user, a computer, or an IP address).

Chronicle: Chronicle is a cloud-native SIEM tool from Google that retains, analyzes, and searches log data to identify potential security threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. Chronicle allows you to collect and analyze log data according to: 
A specific asset
A domain name
A user
An IP address


Chronicle dashboards
Enterprise insights dashboard: The enterprise insights dashboard highlights recent alerts. It identifies suspicious domain names in logs, known as indicators of compromise (IOCs).
Data ingestion and health dashboard: The data ingestion and health dashboard shows the number of event logs, log sources, and success rates of data being processed into Chronicle.
IOC matches dashboard: The IOC matches dashboard indicates the top threats, risks, and vulnerabilities to the organization. 
Main dashboard: The main dashboard displays a high-level summary of information related to the organization’s data ingestion, alerting, and event activity over time. 
Rule detections dashboard: The rule detections dashboard provides statistics related to incidents with the highest occurrences, severities, and detections over time.
User sign in overview dashboard: The user sign in overview dashboard provides information about user access behavior across the organization.



Cybersecurity tools
Open source tools: free to use and user friendly
Linux
Suricata
Proprietary tools: developed and owned by a person or company

Incident response: An organization’s quick attempt to identify an attack, contain the damage, and correct the effects of a security breach

Operating system (OS): The interface between computer hardware and the user















Course 2
Module 4 - Use playbooks to respond to incidents

Playbook: A manual that provides details about any operational action

Incident response: An organization’s quick attempt to identify an attack, contain the damage, and correct the effects of a security breach

Incident response playbook phases
Preparation: Before incidents occur, mitigate potential impacts on the organization by documenting, establishing staffing plans, and educating users.
Detection and analysis: Detect and analyze events by implementing defined processes and appropriate technology
Containment: Prevent further damage and reduce immediate impact of incidents.
Eradication and recovery: Completely remove artifacts of the incident so that an organization can return to normal operations.
Post incident activity: Document the incident, inform organizational leadership, and apply lessons learned
Coordination: Report incidents and share information throughout the response process, based on established standards.

You can use playbooks for:
Open attacks
Privacy incidents
Data leaks
Denial of service attacks
Service alerts
















Course 3
Module 1 - Network architecture

Network: A group of connected devices

Local Area Network(LAN): A network that spans a small area like an office building, a school, or a home

Wide Area Network(WAN): A network that spans a large geographic area like a city, state,or country

Hub: A network device that broadcasts information to every device on the network

Switch: A device that makes connections between specific devices on a network by sending and receiving data between them

Router: A network device that connects multiple networks together

Modem: A device that connects your router to the internet and brings internet access to the LAN

Virtualizations tools: Pieces of software that perform network operations

Firewall: a network security device that monitors traffic to or from your network

Cloud computing: The practice of using remote servers, applications, and network services that are hosted on the internet instead of on local physical devices

Cloud network: A collection of servers or computers that stores resources and data in remote data centers that can be accessed via the internet

CSP
Software as a service (SaaS): software suites operated by the CSP that a company can use remotely without hosting the software.
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): use of virtual computer components offered by the CSP. 
Platform as a service (PaaS): tools that application developers can use to design custom applications for their company


Data packet: A basic unit of information that travels from one device to another within a network


Data Packet components
Header
IP address
MAC Address
Protocol Number
Body: Message
Footer

Bandwidth: The amount of data a device receives every second

Speed: The rate at which data packets are received or downloaded

Packet sniffing: The practice of capturing and inspecting data packets across a network

Transmission Control Protocol(TCP): An internet communication protocol that allows two devices to form a connection and stream data

User Datagram Protocol(UDP): a connectionless protocol that does not establish a connection between devices before transmissions

Internet Protocol(IP): A set of standards used for routing and addressing data packets as they travel between devices on a network

Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP): The ICMP shares error information and status updates of data packets.

Port: A software based location that organizes the sending and receiving of data between devices on a network

Commonly used port numbers
Port 25: Email
Port 443: Secure internet communication
Port 20: Large file transfers










TCP/IP model: A framework used to visualize how data is organized and transmitted across the network
First layer: Network Access
Second layer: Internet 
Internet Protocol(IP)
Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP)
Third layer: Transport
Transmission Control Protocol(TCP)
User Datagram Protocol(UDP)
Fourth layer: Application
Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP)
Simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP)
Secure shell (SSH)
File transfer protocol (FTP)
Domain name system (DNS)

OSI model: a standardized concept that describes the seven layers computers use to communicate and send data over the network
1. Physical layer
2. Data link layer
3. Network layer
4. Transport layer
5. Session layer
6. Presentation layer
7. Application layer

Internet Protocol(IP) address: A unique string of characters that identifies the location of a device on the internet

2 types of IP address
IP version 4(IPv4) ex: 19.117.63.126
IP version 6(IPv6) ex: 684D:1111:222:3333:4444:5555:6:77

MAC address: A unique alphanumeric identifier that is assigned to each physical device on a network

There are 13 fields within the header of an IPv4 packet:
Version (VER): This 4 bit component tells receiving devices what protocol the packet is using. The packet used in the illustration above is an IPv4 packet.
IP Header Length (HLEN or IHL): HLEN is the packet’s header length. This value indicates where the packet header ends and the data segment begins. 
Type of Service (ToS): Routers prioritize packets for delivery to maintain quality of service on the network. The ToS field provides the router with this information.
Total Length: This field communicates the total length of the entire IP packet, including the header and data. The maximum size of an IPv4 packet is 65,535 bytes.
Identification: IPv4 packets can be up to 65, 535 bytes, but most networks have a smaller limit. In these cases, the packets are divided, or fragmented, into smaller IP packets. The identification field provides a unique identifier for all the fragments of the original IP packet so that they can be reassembled once they reach their destination.
Flags: This field provides the routing device with more information about whether the original packet has been fragmented and if there are more fragments in transit.
Fragmentation Offset: The fragment offset field tells routing devices where in the original packet the fragment belongs.
Time to Live (TTL): TTL prevents data packets from being forwarded by routers indefinitely. It contains a counter that is set by the source. The counter is decremented by one as it passes through each router along its path. When the TTL counter reaches zero, the router currently holding the packet will discard the packet and return an ICMP Time Exceeded error message to the sender. 
Protocol: The protocol field tells the receiving device which protocol will be used for the data portion of the packet.
Header Checksum: The header checksum field contains a checksum that can be used to detect corruption of the IP header in transit. Corrupted packets are discarded.
Source IP Address: The source IP address is the IPv4 address of the sending device.
Destination IP Address: The destination IP address is the IPv4 address of the destination device.
Options: The options field allows for security options to be applied to the packet if the HLEN value is greater than five. The field communicates these options to the routing devices.


Course 3
Module 2 - Network operations

Network protocols: A set of rules used by two or more devices on a network to describe the order of delivery and the structure of the data

Communication protocols
Transmission Control Protocol(TCP): An internet communications protocol that allows two devices to form a connection and stream data
User Datagram Protocol(UDP): a connectionless protocol that does not establish a connection between devices before transmissions
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP):an application layer protocol that provides a method of communication between clients and website servers (uses port 80)
Domain Name System(DNS): A network protocol that translates internet domain names into IP addresses

Management protocols
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP): a network protocol used for monitoring and managing devices on a network
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP): an internet protocol used by devices to tell each other about data transmission errors across the network

Security protocols
HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure(HTTPS): A network protocol that provides a secure method of communication between clients and website server
Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP): a secure protocol used to transfer files from one device to another over a network.
SSL/TLS


Address Resolution Protocol(ARP): A network protocol used to determine the MAC address of the next router or device on the path

Private IP Address
Assigned by the router
Unique only within private network
No cost to use
Address ranges:
10.0.0.0-10.255.255.255
172.16.0.0-172.31.255.255
192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255
Public IP Addresses
Assigned by ISP and IANA
Unique address in global internet
Costs to lease a public IP address
Assignable address ranges:
1.0.0.0-9.255.255.255
11.0.0.0-126.255.255.255
128.0.0.0-172.15.255.255
172.32.0.0-192.167.255.255
192.169.0.0-233.255.255.255


Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol(DHCP): an application layer protocol used on a network to configure devices

Telnet: an application layer protocol that is used to connect with a remote system

Post office protocol(POP): an application layer (layer 4 of the TCP/IP model) protocol used to manage and retrieve email from a mail server

Internet Message Access Protocol(IMAP): IMAP is used for incoming email. It downloads the headers of emails and the message content

Simple Mail Transfer Protocol: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is used to transmit and route email from the sender to the recipient’s address.


DHCP
UDP port 67 (servers)
UDP port 68 (clients)
ARP
none
Telnet
TCP port 23
SSH
TCP port 22
POP3
TCP/UDP port 110 (unencrypted)
TCP/UDP port 995 (encrypted, SSL/TLS)
IMAP
TCP port 143 (unencrypted)
TCP port 993 (encrypted, SSL/TLS)
SMTP
TCP/UDP Port 25 (unencrypted)
SMTPS
TCP/UDP port 587 (encrypted, TLS)

IEEE 802.11(WIFI): A set of standards that define communication for wireless LANs

WiFi Protected Access(WPA): A wireless security protocol for devices to connect to the internet

Wired equivalent privacy (WEP): a wireless security protocol designed to provide users with the same level of privacy on wireless network connections as they have on wired network connections

Firewall: A network security device that monitors traffic to and from your network

Port filtering: A firewall function that blocks or allows certain port numbers to limit unwanted communication

Cloud-based firewalls: Software firewalls that are hosted by a cloud service provider

Stateful: A class of firewall that keeps track of information passing through it and proactively filters out threats

Stateless: A class of firewall that operates based on predefined rules and does not keep track of information from data packets (less secure)

Benefits of next generation firewalls(NGFWs)
Deep packet inspection
Intrusion protection
Threat intelligence

Virtual Private Network(VPN): A network security service that changes your public IP address and hides your virtual location so that you can keep your data private when you are using a public network like the internet.

Encapsulation: A process performed by a VPN service that protects your data by wrapping sensitive data in other data packets

Security zone: A segment of a network that protects the internal network from the internet

Network segmentation: A security technique that divides the network into segments

Uncontrolled zone: Any network outside of the organization’s control

Controlled zone: A subnet that protects the internal network from the uncontrolled zone	
Areas in the controlled zone
Demilitarized zone(DMZ)
Internal network
Restricted zone
Proxy server: A server that fulfills the requests of a client by forwarding them on to other servers

Forward proxy server: Regulates and restricts a person’s access to the internet

Reverse proxy server: Regulates and restricts the internet’s access to an internal server

Subnetting: The subdivision of a network into logical groups called subnets



WireGuard VPN: WireGuard is a high-speed VPN protocol, with advanced encryption, to protect users when they are accessing the internet.

IPSec VPN: IPSec is older and more complex than WireGuard

































Course 3
Module 3- Secure against network intrusions

Common network intrusion attacks
Malware 
Spoofing
Packet sniffing
Packet flooding

Attacks can harm an organization by
Leaking valuable or confidential information
Damaging an organization’s reputation
Impacting customer retention

Denial of service attack(DoS): An attack that targets a network or server and floods it with network traffic

Distributed denial of service attack(DDoS):A type of denial of service attack that uses multiple devices or servers in different locations to flood the target network with unwanted traffic

Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP): An internet protocol used by devices to tell each other about data transmission errors across the network

Common DoS Attack
SYN(synchronize) flood attack: A type of DoS attack that simulates a TCP connection and floods a server with SYN packets

ICMP flood: A type of DoS attack performed by an attacker repeatedly sending ICMP packets to a network server

Ping of death: A type of Dos attack caused when a hacker pings a system by sending it an oversized ICMP packet that is bigger than 64KB

Network protocol analyzer(packet sniffer)
SolarWinds NetFlow Traffic Analyzer
ManageEngine OpManager
Azure Network Watcher
Wireshark
Tcpdump


tcpdump: tcpdump is a command-line network protocol analyzer


Some information you receive from a packet capture includes: 
Timestamp: The output begins with the timestamp, formatted as hours, minutes, seconds, and fractions of a second.  
Source IP: The packet’s origin is provided by its source IP address.
Source port: This port number is where the packet originated.
Destination IP: The destination IP address is where the packet is being transmitted to.
Destination port: This port number is where the packet is being transmitted to.


Passive packet sniffing: A type of attack where data packets are read in transit
Active packet sniffing: A type of attack where data packets are manipulated in transit
How to prevent these attacks: VPN, HTTPS


IP spoofing: A network attack performed when an attacker changes the source IP of a data packet to impersonate an authorized system and gain access to a network
On-path attack: An attack where a malicious actor places themselves in the middle of an authorized connection and intercepts or alters the data in transit
Replay attack: A network attack performed when a malicious actor intercepts a data packet in transit and delays it or repeats it at another time
Smurf attack: A network attack performed when an attacker sniffs an authorized user’s IP address and floods it with packets










Course 3
Module 4 

Security hardening: The process of strengthening a system to reduce its vulnerability and attack surface

Attack surface: All the potential vulnerabilities that a threat actor could exploit

Operating system(OS): The interface between computer hardware and the user

Patch update: A software and operating system update that addresses security vulnerabilities within a program or product

Baseline configuration:(baseline image): A documented set of specifications within a system that is used as a basis for future builds, releases, and updates

Multi-Factor authentication(MFA): A security measure which requires a user to verify their identity in two or more ways to access a system or network

Brute force attacks: a trial-and-error process of discovering private information
Simple brute force attacks. When attackers try to guess a user's login credentials, it’s considered a simple brute force attack
In dictionary attacks, attackers use a list of commonly used passwords and stolen credentials from previous breaches to access a system

Sandbox environments: A sandbox is a type of testing environment that allows you to execute software or programs separate from your network

Prevention measures
Salting and hashing
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) and two-factor authentication (2FA)
CAPTCHA and reCAPTCHA
Password policies

Network security hardening
Port filtering: A firewall function that blocks or allows certain port numbers to limit unwanted communication 
Network access privilege
Encryption





Tasks performed
Firewall rules maintenance
Network log analysis
Patch updates
Server backups

Network log analysis: the process of examining network logs to identify events of interest by using log analyzer tool and SIEM tool

SIEM: An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization

Intrusion detection system(IDS): an application that monitors system activity and alerts on possible intrusions

Intrusion Prevention system(IPS): an application that monitors system activity for intrusive activity and takes action to stop the activity

Zero day attack: an exploit that was previously unknown

Hypervisors: A hypervisor abstracts the host’s hardware from the operating software environment
VMware®'s ESXi
VirtualBox

Cryptographic erasure:  a method of erasing the encryption key for the encrypted data

World-writable file: A file that can be altered by anyone in the world


Course 4
Module 1

Operating system(OS): The interface between computer hardware and the user

Hardware: The physical components of a computer

Application: A program that performs a specific task

Basic Input/Output System (BIOS): a microchip that contains loading instructions for the computer and is prevalent in older systems. 

Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI): a microchip that contains loading instructions for the computer and replaces BIOS on more modern systems.

Bootloader: A software program that boots the operating system

Benefits of virtual machines
Security
Efficiency
Managing virtual machines: Virtual machines can be managed with a software called a hypervisor. Hypervisors help users manage multiple virtual machines and connect the virtual and physical hardware
Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM)

User interface(UI): A program that allows the user to control the functions of the operating system

Basic GUI components
Start menu 
Task bar
Desktop with icons and shortcuts

graphical user interface (GUI): a user interface that uses icons on the screen to manage different tasks on the computer

Command-line interface(CLI): A text-based user interface that uses commands to interact with the computer


Course 4
Module 2

Linux: An open-source operating system

Components of Linux
User
Application
Shell
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
Kernel
Hardware

User: The person interacting with a computer

Application: A program that performs a specific task

Shell: The command-line interpreter

Filesystem Hierarchy Standard(FHS): The component of the Linux OS that organizes data

Kernel: The component of the Linux OS that manages processes and memory

Hardware: The physical components of a computer
CPU
Mouse
Keyboard

Peripheral devices: hardware components that are attached and controlled by the computer system
Monitor
Printer

Distributions: The different versions of Linux
Parent distributions
Red Hat Enterprise Linux(centOS)
Slackware(SUSE)
Debian(Ubuntu and KALI LINUX)

Penetration test: A simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities in systems, networks, websites, applications, and processes

Penetration testing tools in KALI LINUX 
Metasploit
Burp Suite
John the Ripper

Digital forensics: The practice of collecting and analyzing data to determine what has happened after an attack

Digital forensics tools in KALI LINUX
Tcpdump
Wireshark
Autopsy

Ubuntu: an open-source, user-friendly distribution that is widely used in security and other industries. It has both a command-line interface (CLI) and a graphical user interface (GUI). 

Parrot: an open-source distribution that is commonly used for security. Similar to KALI LINUX ™,

Red Hat Enterprise Linux: a subscription-based distribution of Linux built for enterprise use

AlmaLinux : a community-driven Linux distribution that was created as a stable replacement for CentOS. 

Package: a piece of software that can be combined with other packages to form an application

package manager: a tool that helps users install, manage, and remove packages or applications

Advanced Package Tool(APT): a tool used with Debian-derived distributions. It is run from the command-line interface to manage, search, and install packages

Yellowdog Updater Modified (YUM):a tool used with Red Hat-derived distributions. It is run from the command-line interface to manage, search, and install packages. YUM works with .rpm files.
Shell: The command-line interpreter

Command: An instruction telling the computer to do something

Bash: the default shell in most Linux distributions. It’s considered a user-friendly shell. You can use bash for basic Linux commands as well as larger projects.

Standard input: Information received by the OS via the command line

echo: A linux command that outputs a specified string of text

String data: data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters

Standard output: Information returned by the OS through the shell

Standard error: Error messages returned by the OS through the shell




Course 4
Module 3

Bash: The default shell in most Linux distributions

Command: An instruction telling the computer to do something

Argument(Linux): Specific information needed by a command

Filesystem Hierarchy Standard(FHS): The component of the Linux OS that organizes data

Root directory: The highest-level directory in Linux

Commands
pwd: Prints the working directory onto the screen
ls: Displays the names of files and directories in the current working directory
cd: Navigates between directories
cat: Displays the content of a file
head: Displays just the beginning of a file, by default 10 lines
tail: The tail command does the opposite of head. This command can be used to display just the end of a file, by default 10 lines.
less: The less command returns the content of a file one page at a time

An absolute file path is the full file path that starts from the root, and a relative file path is a shorter file path that starts from the current directory.

Commands
grep: Searches a specified file and returns all lines in the file containing a specified string
I(piping): Sends the standard output of one command as standard input to another command for further processing
find: The find command searches for directories and files that meet specified criteria.

Commands
mkdir: Creates a new directory
rmdir: The rmdir command removes, or deletes, a directory
touch: Creates a new file
rm: Removes, or deletes, a file
mv: Moves a file or directory to a new location
cp: Copies a file or directory into a new location

nano: a command-line file editor that is available by default in many Linux distributions

Permissions: The type of access granted for a file or directory
Read
Write
Execute

Types of owners
User
Group
Other

Options: Modify the behavior of the command
Commands
ls -l : displays permissions to files and directories 
ls -a: displays hidden files
ls -la: displays permissions to files and directories including hidden files
chmod: changes permissions on files and directories

Root user(or superuser): A user with elevated privileges to modify the system

Problems with logging in as root
Security risks
Irreversible mistakes
Accountability

sudo: temporarily grants elevated permissions to specific users
Commands
useradd: adds a user to the system
userdel: deletes a user from the system
chown: The chown command changes ownership of a file or directory
Commands
man: displays information on other commands and how they work
whatis: displays a description of a command on a single line
Apropos: Searches the manual page descriptions for a specified string

Course 4
Module 4

Database: An organized collection of information or data
Accessed by multiple people simultaneously 
Store massive amounts of data
Perform complex tasks while accessing data

Spreadsheets
Designed for a single user or a small team
Store less data

Relational database: A structured database containing tables that are related to each other

Primary Key: A column where every row has a unique entry

Foreign key: A column in a table that is a primary key in another table

SQL(Structured Query Language): A programming language used to create, interact with, and request information from a database

Query: A request for data from a database table or a combination of tables

Log: A record of events that occur within an organization’s systems

SQL
SELECT: Indicates which columns to return
FROM: Indicates which table to query
BETWEEN: An operator that filters for numbers or dates within a range

Syntax: The rules that determine what is correctly structured in a computing language

Filtering: Selecting data that match a certain condition

Operator: A symbol or keyword that represents an operation
=
>
<
<>
>=
<=


Commands
WHERE: Indicates the condition for a filter
LIKE: Used with WHERE to search for a pattern in a column

String data: Data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters

Numeric data: Data consisting of numbers

Date and time data: Data representing a date and/or time
Commands
AND: Specifies that both conditions must be met simultaneously
OR: Specifies that either condition can be met
NOT: Negates a condition
INNER JOIN: Return rows matching on a specified column that exists in more than one table
Types of outer joins
LEFT JOIN: Returns all of the records of the first table
RIGHT JOIN: Return all of the records of the second table
FULL OUTER JOIN: Returns all records from both tables

Course 5
Module 1

1Risk: Anything that can impact the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of an asset
Security risk planning
Assets
Threats
Vulnerabilities

Asset: An item perceived as having value to an organization

Threat: Any circumstance or event that can negatively impact assets

Vulnerability: A weakness that can be exploited by a threat

Asset management: The process of tracking assets and the risks that affect them

Asset inventory: A catalog of assets that need to be protected

Asset classification: The practice of labeling assets based on sensitivity and importance to an organization

Levels of asset classification
Public
Internal-only
Confidential
Restricted

Data: Information that is  translated, processed, or stored by a computer

States of data
In use
In transit
At rest

Data in use: data being accessed by one or more users

Data in transit: Data traveling from one point to another

Data at rest: Data not currently being accessed

Information security(InfoSec): The practice of keeping data in all states away from unauthorized users
three main categories of cloud-based services
Software as a service (SaaS): SaaS refers to front-end applications that users access via a web browser
Platform as a service (PaaS): PaaS refers to back-end application development tools that clients can access online. 
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): IaaS customers are given remote access to a range of back-end systems that are hosted by the cloud service provider. 
Google Cloud Platform
Microsoft Azure


Cloud security challenges
Misconfiguration is one of the biggest concerns. Customers of cloud-based services are responsible for configuring their own security environment. Oftentimes, they use out-of-the-box configurations that fail to address their specific security objectives.
Cloud-native breaches are more likely to occur due to misconfigured services.
Monitoring access might be difficult depending on the client and level of service.
Meeting regulatory standards is also a concern, particularly in industries that are required by law to follow specific requirements such as HIPAA, PCI DSS, and GDPR.


Types of risk categories
Damage 
Disclosure
Loss of information




Elements of a security plan
Policies
Standards
Procedures


Policy: A set of rules that reduces risk and protects information


Standards: References that inform how to set polices


Procedures: Step by step instructions to perform a specific security task


Complicance: The process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations


Regulations: Rules set by a government or other authority to control the way something is done


NIST Cybersecurity Framework(CSF): A voluntary framework that consists of standards guidelines, and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk
Core
Tiers
Profiles


Five functions of  the NIST CSF core
Identify
Protect
Detect
Respond
Recover




Course 5
Module 2

Security controls: Safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks
Technical 
Operational 
Managerial

Information privacy: The protection of unauthorized access and distribution of data

Principle of least privilege: The concept of granting only the minimal access and authorization required to complete a task or function

Data owner: The person that decides who can access, edit, use, or destroy their information

Data custodian: Anyone or anything that’s responsible for the safe handling, transport, and storage of information

Types of user accounts
Guest accounts are provided to external users who need to access an internal network, like customers, clients, contractors, or business partners.
User accounts are assigned to staff based on their job duties.
Service accounts are granted to applications or software that needs to interact with other software on the network.
Privileged accounts have elevated permissions or administrative access.


Three common approaches to auditing user accounts
Usage audits
Privilege audits
Account change audits




The data lifecycle
Collect
Store
Use
Archive
Destroy


Data governance
Data owner: the person that decides who can access, edit, use, or destroy their information.
Data custodian: anyone or anything that's responsible for the safe handling, transport, and storage of information.
Data steward: the person or group that maintains and implements data governance policies set by an organization.

Types of information
PII(Personally identifiable information) is any information used to infer an individual's identity., or PII, refers to information that can be used to contact or locate someone.
PHI(protected health information).  In the U.S., it is regulated by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which defines PHI as “information that relates to the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual.” In the EU, PHI has a similar definition but it is regulated by the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
SPII is a specific type of PII that falls under stricter handling guidelines. The S stands for sensitive, meaning this is a type of personally identifiable information that should only be accessed on a need-to-know basis, such as a bank account number or login credentials.


Information privacy refers to the protection from unauthorized access and distribution of data.


Information security (InfoSec) refers to the practice of keeping data in all states away from unauthorized users.


Notable privacy regulations
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): a set of rules and regulations developed by the European Union (EU) that puts data owners in total control of their personal information.
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS): a set of security standards formed by major organizations in the financial industry.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA):a U.S. law that requires the protection of sensitive patient health information


A security audit is a review of an organization's security controls, policies, and procedures against a set of expectations.


A security assessment is a check to determine how resilient current security implementations are against threats.


Cryptography: The process of transforming information into a form that unintended readers can’t understand
Algorithm: A set of rules used that solve a problem


Cryptography key: A mechanism that decrypts ciphertext


Brute force attack: A trial and error process of discovering private information


Public key infrastructure (PKI): An encryption framework that secures the exchange of information online


Asymmetric encryption: The use of a public and private key pair for encryption and decryption of data


Symmetric encryption: The use of a single secret key to exchange information
Public key infrastructure(PKI)  process
Exchange of encrypted information
Establish trust using a system of digital certificates 


Digital certificates: A file that verifies the identity of a public key holder


Hash function: An algorithm that produces a code that can’t be decrypted


Non-repudiation: The concept that the authenticity of information can’t be denied


Rainbow tables: a file of pre-generated hash values and their associated plaintext. 


Access controls: Security controls that manage access, authorization, and accountability of information


AAA framework
Authentication
Authorization
Accounting
Factors of authentication
Knowledge: something the user knows
Ownership: something the user possesses
Characteristic: something the user is


Single sign-on(SSO): A technology that combines several different logins into one
SSO improves the user experience by eliminating the number of usernames and passwords people have to remember.
Companies can lower costs by streamlining how they manage connected services.
SSO improves overall security by reducing the number of access points attackers can target.




Multi-factor authentication(MFA): A security measure which requires a user to verify their identity in two or more ways to access a system or network


Separation of duties: The principle that users should not be given levels of authorization that would allow them to misuse a system


Basic auth: The technology used to establish a user’s request to access a server


OAuth: An open-standard authorization protocol that shares designated access between applications


API token: A small block of encrypted code that contains information about a user


Session: A sequence of network HTTP basic auth requests and responses associated with the same user


Session ID: A unique token that identifies a user and their device while accessing the system
Session cookie: A token that websites use to validate a session and determine how long that session should last


Session hijacking: An event when attackers obtain a legitimate user’s session ID










Course 5
Module 3

Vulnerability management: The process of finding and patching vulnerabilities
Identify vulnerabilities
Consider potential exploits
Prepare defense against threats
Evaluate those defenses

Zero-day: An exploit that was previously unknown

Defense in depth: A layered approach to vulnerability management that reduces risk
Perimeter layer: like authentication systems that validate user access
Network layer: which is made up of technologies like network firewalls and others
Endpoint layer: which describes devices on a network, like laptops, desktops, or servers
Application layer: which involves the software that users interact with
Data layer:which includes any information that’s stored, in transit, or in use

Exposure: A mistake that can be exploited by a threat

Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures list(CVE list): An openly accessible dictionary of known vulnerabilities and exposures

MITRE: A collection of non-profit research and development centers

CVE Numbering Authority(CNA): An organization that volunteers to analyze and distribute information on eligible CVEs
CVE list criteria	
Independent of other issues
Recognized as a potential security risk
Submitted with supporting evidence
Only affect one codebase

Common Vulnerability Scoring System(CVSS): A measurement system that scores the severity of a vulnerability

OWASP: a nonprofit foundation that works to improve the security of software












OWASP Top 10
Broken access control
Cryptographic failures
Injection
Insecure design
Security misconfiguration
Vulnerable and outdated components
Identification and authentication failures
Software and data integrity failures
Security logging and monitoring failures
Server-side request forgery

OSINT tools
VIrusTotal
MITRE ATT&CK
OSINT Framework
Have i been pwned

Vulnerability assessment: The internal review process of an organization’s security systems
Process
Identification
Vulnerability analysis 
Risk assessment
Remediation






Penetration testing strategies
Open box testing: when the tester has the same privileged access that an internal developer would have—information like system architecture, data flow, and network diagrams.
Closed box testing: when the tester has little to no access to internal systems—similar to a malicious hacker. 
Partial knowledge testing: when the tester has limited access and knowledge of an internal system

Big bounty programs: Organizations commonly run bug bounty programs which offer freelance pen testers financial rewards for finding and reporting vulnerabilities in their products

Attack surface: All the potential vulnerabilities that a threat actor could exploit

Security hardening: The process of strengthening a system to reduce its vulnerabilities and attack surface
Attack vectors: The pathways attackers use to penetrate security defenses

Practicing an attacker mindset
Identify a target
Determine how the target can be accessed
Evaluate attack vectors that can be exploited
Find the tools and methods of attack

Defending attack vectors
Educating users
Applying the principle of least privilege
Using the right security controls and tools
Building a diverse security team

Social engineering: A manipulation technique that exploits human error to gain private information, access, or valuables
Stages of social engineering
Prepare
Establish trust
Use persuasion tactics
Disconnect from the target

Preventing social engineering
Implementing managerial controls
Staying informed of trends
Sharing your knowledge with others

Common types of social engineering 
Baiting: a social engineering tactic that tempts people into compromising their security.
Phishing: the use of digital communications to trick people into revealing sensitive data or deploying malicious software. 
Quid pro quo: a type of baiting used to trick someone into believing that they’ll be rewarded in return for sharing access, information, or money
Tailgating: a social engineering tactic in which unauthorized people follow an authorized person into a restricted area
Watering hole:a type of attack when a threat actor compromises a website frequently visited by a specific group of users

Phishing kit: A collection of software tools needed to launch a phishing campaign

Phishing kit tools
Malicious attachments
Fake data-collection forms
Fraudulent web links

Form of phishing
Smishing: The use of text messages to obtain sensitive information or to impersonate a known source
Vishing: The exploitation of electronic voice communication to obtain sensitive information or impersonate a known source
Spear phishing: a subset of email phishing in which specific people are purposefully targeted
Whaling: a category of spear phishing attempts that are aimed at high-ranking executives in an organization.

Phishing security measures
Anti-Phishing policies
Employee training resources
Email filters
Intrusion prevention systems

Malware: software designed to harm devices or networks
Virus: Malicious code written to interfere with computer operations and cause damage to data and software
Worm: Malware that can duplicate and spread itself across systems on its own
Trojan: Malware that looks like a legitimate file or program
Ransomware: Type of malicious attack where attackers encrypt an organization’s data and demand payment to restore access
Spyware: Malware that’s used to gather and sell information without consent
Fileless malware:does not need to be installed by the user because it uses legitimate programs that are already installed to infect a computer.
Rootkits: malware that provides remote, administrative access to a computer. Most attackers use rootkits to open a backdoor to systems, allowing them to install other forms of malware or to conduct network security attacks.

Cryptojacking: A form of malware that installs software to illegally mine cryptocurrencies

Intrusion detection systems(IDS): An application that monitors system activity and alerts on possible intrusions

Sighs of cryptojacking
Slowdown
Increased CPU usage
Sudden system crashes
Fast draining batteries
Usually high electricity costs

Web-based exploits: Malicious code or behavior that’s used to take advantage of coding flaws in a web application

Injection attack: Malicious code inserted into a vulnerable application

Cross-site scripting(XSS): an injection attack that inserts code into a vulnerable website or web application
Types of cross-site scripting attacks
Reflected 
Stored
DOM-based

Reflected XSS Attack: An instance when malicious script is sent to a server and activated during the server’s response

Stored XSS attack: An instance when malicious script is injected directly on the server

DOM-based XSS attack: An instance when malicious script exists in the webpage a browser loads

SQL: A programming language used to create, interact with, and request information from a database

SQL injection: An attack that executes unexpected queries on a database

Prepared statement: A coding technique that executes SQL statements before passing them on to the database

3 main categories of SQL injection
In band
Out of band
Inferential

Threat modeling: The process of identifying assets,their vulnerabilities, and how each is exposed to threats

Threat modeling steps
Define the scope
Identify threats
Characterize the environment
Analyze threats
Mitigate risks
Evaluate findings

Threat actor: Any person or group who presents a security risk

Attack tree: A diagram that maps threats to assets

PASTA: A popular threat modeling framework that’s used across many industries

PASTA threat model framework
Define business and security objectives
Define the technical scope
Decompose the application
Perform a threat analysis
Perform a vulnerability analysis
Conduct attack modeling
Analyze risk and impact

Common frameworks
STRIDE
PASTA
Trike
VAST




Course 6
Module 1

Incident: An occurrence that actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful authority, the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or an information system, or constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies

Event: An observable occurrence on a network, system, or device

The 5 W’s of an incident
Who triggered the incident
What happened 
When the incident took place
Where the incident took place
Why the incident occurred

Computer security incident response teams(CSIRT): A specialized group of security professionals that are trained in incident management and response

Roles in CSIRT
Security analyst
Technical lead
Incident coordinator

NIST incident response lifecycle
Preparation
Detection and analysis
Containment, Eradication, and Recovery
Post-incident activity

Tier 1 SOC analyst
Monitoring, reviewing and prioritizing alerts based on criticality or severity
Creating and closing alerts using ticketing systems
Escalating alert tickets to Tier 2 or Tier 3 

Tier 2
Receiving escalated tickets from L1 and conducting deeper investigation
Configuring and refining security tools
Reporting to the SOC Lead 



Tier 3
Managing the operations of their team
Exploring methods of detection
Reporting to the SOC manager

SOC manager
Hiring, training, and evaluating the SOC team members
Creating performance metrics and managing the performance of the SOC team
Developing reports related to incidents, compliance, and auditing

Forensic investigators: Forensic investigators are commonly L2s and L3s who collect, preserve, and analyze digital evidence related to security incidents to determine what happened.

Threat hunters: Threat hunters are typically L3s who work to detect, analyze, and defend against new and advanced cybersecurity threats using threat intelligence.

Elements of a security plan
Policies
Standards
Procedures

Incident response plan: A document that outlines the procedures to take in each step of incident response

Elements of an incident plan
Incident response procedures
System information
Other documents

Tool types
Detection and management tools
Documentation tools
Investigative tools

Documentation: Any form of recorded content that is used for a specific purpose
Playbooks
Incident handler’s journals
Policies
Plans
Final reports

Ticketing system	
Jira

Other tools
Google sheets
Audio recorders
Cameras
Handwritten notes

Intrusion detection system(IDS): An application that monitors system and network activity and produces alerts on possible intrusions

Intrusion prevention system(IPS): An application that monitors system activity for intrusions and take action to stop the activity

IDS and IPS tools
Snort
Zeek
Kismet
Sagan
Suricata

Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) : An application that collects and analyzes log data to monitor critical activities in an organization

SIEM process
Collect and aggregate data
Normalize data
Analyze data

Security orchestration, automation, and response(SOAR): A collection of applications, tools, and workflows that uses automation to respond to security events

SIEM tools
AlienVault® OSSIM™
Chronicle
Elastic
Exabeam
IBM QRadar® Security Intelligence Platform
LogRhythm
Splunk


False negative: A state where the presence of a threat is not detected
False positive: An alert that incorrectly detects the presence of a threat
True negative: A state where there is no detection of malicious activity
True positive An alert that correctly detects the presence of an attack

Course 6
Module 2

Indicators of compromise(IOC): Observable evidence that suggests signs of a potential security incident

Data Exfilteration: Unauthorized transmission of data from system

Defensive measures
Prevent attacker access
Monitor network activity
Protect assets
Detect and stop the exfiltration

Components of a packet
Header
Payload
Footer

Network protocol analyzer(packet sniffer): A tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic within a network

Packet capture(P-cap): A file containing data packets intercepted from an interface or network
Course 6
Module 3

Analysis: The investigation and validation of alerts

Threat hunting:  the proactive search for threats on a network

Hash values: Hashes that correspond to known malicious files. These are often used to provide unique references to specific samples of malware or to files involved in an intrusion.
IP addresses: An internet protocol address like 192.168.1.1
Domain names: A web address such as www.google.com 
Network artifacts: Observable evidence created by malicious actors on a network. For example, information found in network protocols such as User-Agent strings. 
Host artifacts: Observable evidence created by malicious actors on a host. A host is any device that’s connected on a network. For example, the name of a file created by malware.
Tools: Software that’s used by a malicious actor to achieve their goal. For example, attackers can use password cracking tools like John the Ripper to perform password attacks to gain access into an account.
Tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs): This is the behavior of a malicious actor. Tactics refer to the high-level overview of the behavior. Techniques provide detailed descriptions of the behavior relating to the tactic. Procedures are highly detailed descriptions of the technique. TTPs are the hardest to detect. 
Domain names: org.misecure.com is reported as a malicious contacted domain under the Relations tab in the VirusTotal report.
IP address: 207.148.109.242 is listed as one of many IP addresses under the Relations tab in the VirusTotal report. This IP address is also associated with the org.misecure.com domain as listed in the DNS Resolutions section under the Behavior tab from the Zenbox sandbox report.
Hash value: 287d612e29b71c90aa54947313810a25 is a MD5 hash listed under the Details tab in the VirusTotal report.
Network/host artifacts: Network-related artifacts that have been observed in this malware are HTTP requests made to the org.misecure.com domain. This is listed in the Network Communications section under the Behavior tab from the Venus Eye Sandbox and Rising MOVES sandbox reports. 
Tools: Input capture is listed in the Collection section under the Behavior tab from the Zenbox sandbox report. Malicious actors use input capture to steal user input such as passwords, credit card numbers, and other sensitive information.
TTPs: Command and control is listed as a tactic under the Behavior tab from the Zenbox sandbox report. Malicious actors use command and control to establish communication channels between an infected system and their own system.




